[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, we recently
did that episode with Andrew Bishop of
Signnum on sort of geopolitical
forecasting, etc. And I don't know if
you remember, but the last question we
asked him like sort of sent a shiver
down my spine a little bit. Do you
remember that?
>> He was uh pretty pessimistic about the
outlook for an actual conflict between
China and Taiwan, one that would
presumably maybe draw in other world
powers, including the US.
>> Yeah. I think what actually really
chilled me about that was, you know, I
asked him, I said, you know, what are
the prospects for some sort of Chinese
invasion of Taiwan with the next 5
years? What chilled me was how quickly
he answered yes, right? Or it was not
the fact that he considered it to be a
high probability, is that he considered
it to be a high probability without sort
of humming and hawing about it. And I
found that to be very disturbing.
>> That doesn't surprise me that much. I
think I told the story about I wrote a
dissertation in college about I thought
China would invade Taiwan before the
2008 Olympics. So that turned out to be
wrong. But I think you know lots of
people have been kind of predicting this
for a long time. And it brings up the
question of like what exactly is the
catalyst for these tensions between the
Republic of China and the PRC to
actually morph into physical conflict?
And then I guess the question of like
how wars come about in general, how they
come about in theory, the connection
between trade wars and hot wars. Of
course, there was that book several
years ago. Trade wars are class wars,
but trade wars can also become
>> trade wars are also actual wars.
>> Trade wars. Yeah. Exactly right. Several
years ago, we did an episode with
Christian Parent about Alexander
Hamilton. And one of his points
>> was that while the popular history of
the revolution, the war for
independence, people say, "Oh, you know,
it's about taxes or we don't want to be
taxed on tea or whatever." But that in
his argument, it was really about
British constraints on the US's
inability to turn cane sugar into rum,
move up the value chain, etc. And when
you think about countries constraining
other countries from moving up the
technological value chain, once again,
hard not to think about the tensions
right now between the US and China with
chip export controls and other such
restrictions.
>> In general, it does seem true that a lot
of history tends to well, it kind of
leaves out a lot of economics sometimes.
Like there's so much you could write
about international trade and the impact
on foreign policy, capital flows. I know
you're a big fan of Adam Tus's Wages of
Destruction, which is basically
>> I've mentioned that before.
>> I know. I I'm sure you're going to bring
it up in this conversation, but I really
think it deserves more attention and it
probably doesn't get that much attention
because I guess
>> historians maybe they like to talk
about, you know, sexy military history
and things like that, but it definitely
has relevance. And I guess the question
is how much relevance?
>> Totally. Well, I'm really excited to say
we're going to explore these topics
further and we do have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Dale Copeland, professor of
international politics at the University
of Virginia. He's also the author of a
recent book, A World Safer Commerce:
American Foreign Policy from the
Revolution to the Rise of China. So,
Professor Copelan joining us now. Thank
you so much for coming on.
>> Great to be here. Why don't you just
give us the sort of concise version of
how you think about this link between
trade wars and hot wars?
>> Yes. So, let me start by saying that we
underestimate how much impact trade has
on the geopolitical military stability
of any system. I've explored really
2,000 years of history, but in the last
two books both on the question of trade
and conflict, I found that at least 75%
of the big conflicts between great
powers over the last 250 years have been
directly related to the role of trade
and commerce. But here's what's
interesting. We have two big
perspectives out there. The liberals
believe trade always leads to peace
because hey, if US and China are trading
extensively, why wouldn't they want to
keep the peace going?
>> And the realist school believes it's the
opposite that trade leads to high
dependency and worries about the future.
I'm going to be cut off and therefore
trade should lead to conflict. And you
see this divide in lots of debates. Mir
Shimemer versus some of the liberals for
example. But my position is an
intermediate one. And it says under
certain circumstances, trade can be very
good for peace. If states have positive
expectations about the future trade
environment, they expect to get the
trade that helps them grow economically
and militarily, then they want to keep
the peace going. Think of China since
1990. It wants the peace. It wants the
trade. And it wants to keep growing
through that trade. And it's been great
for China. The other aspect of this
though in history is if expectations of
future trade start to fall or become
negative then the realist kind of logic
kicks in and you have states that become
pessimistic about the future. Think of
Japan 1941
and they decide that they need to go to
war to protect and to get access to the
raw materials and markets that they need
for basic domestic stability and
economic success. So it could go each
way and what of course that means is
that diplomacy matters a lot. US and
China, for example, could be very
peaceful over the next, you know, two
decades if the expectations of future
trade are positive on both sides. But if
tariffs or economic sanctions kick in
and both sides or one side start to
believe that they're doomed to not have
access to the world markets they need,
then the 1941 scenario of Japan might
kick in and it might lead to China, for
example, going after Southeast Asia. you
mentioned Taiwan or it might mean the US
decides it needs to be more aggressive
to keep access to raw materials from
Africa or from Latin America, South
America. So you can see that the basic
point here is that trade can go either
way for my argument and my case studies
almost always show this and I can talk
about a lot of them but the most recent
book in fact starts with the one you
mentioned which is the American
Revolution and I have a I would say a
much more complex view but it's rooted
in commerce and how the Americans felt
that they were being kept down by the
British from growing and becoming the
fullest kind of power they could
and they had to fight a war to break
those economic sanctions or at least the
trade restrictions and the restrictions
that were built into the tax code that
the British imposed. And ironically and
I I say that the best case for thinking
about US China today or at least the one
to avoid is the 1750 to 1776 case where
uh in this case the rising state is
China and it was back then the British
North Americans and the declining state
of Britain back then and the US now is a
good lesson for us if we avoid what the
British did which is the extensive trade
restrictions on the rising state we can
avoid, you know, an intense cold war and
in fact, of course, avoid an actual hot
war. So, we can talk about this in a
more general sense, but that's the
bottom line. That's the overview about
how trade leads to conflict or to peace.
>> So, I always thought of realism as a
school of thought that emphasizes
relative gains. So you know two sides
can be trading partners but if one of
the trading partners is getting a huge
advantage or growing enormously more
than the other side then that kind of
leads to tensions whereas in the
neoliberal framework it's all about
absolute gains right if everyone is
benefiting even if they're unequal gains
then everyone is happy so I'm curious
maybe help us understand your framework
I think you call it dynamic realism can
you give us an example and sort of walk
us through exactly how it works and how
it differs from traditional
interpretations of neoliberalism or just
liberalism versus realism.
>> Sure. Tracy, you captured one aspect
mostly the so-called offensive realist
perspective, John Mirshimer and so
forth, which is that states in that view
are always anxious and worried about the
future. So they don't they never want to
let a inferior state grow through trade.
that relative gain you talked about and
John Mir Shammer for 35 years has said
don't trade with China it's going to
grow and of course China did grow
through trade and he finds that very
upsetting he was one of my professors at
my PhD level and that's one aspect but
my argument is that smart great powers
actually balance or try to grapple with
the tradeoffs in foreign policy yes on
the one hand if you're really obsessed
with the future you don't want to let a
Hitler grow, for example. So, trading
with Germany after 1930 or 1933 was, you
know, a wrongheaded thing. You want to
constrain that state from growing. On
the other hand, most states in history,
including China, are not that bad. They
may have some aggressive intentions, but
they are not necessarily going to
destroy you. And when you're faced with
that kind of rising state, you want to
balance off the desire to keep the other
down from the willingness or the desire
to, let's just say, constrain that other
state through trade benefits. And you
want to give China, for example, through
the 1990s and after the ability to grow
and be relatively peaceful in that
growth and have incentives to not go
after the system. And China it we can
talk about this but China is quite a
unique power. It wants trade. It needs
trade for domestic stability and it has
good reasons not to want to take over
the world so to speak because of its
domestic situation. So helping that that
state grow and build up its power is
actually not necessarily a a good thing
but it's relative to the alternatives
namely cutting it off is actually a
lesser of two evils. And that's where we
bring in this other school of thought we
call defensive realism. And in my
chapter two of my new book, A World Safe
for Commerce, I do talk about that,
about the willingness of states making
trade-offs to accept a relative loss,
that is letting China grow through trade
for the benefit of making the the
overall system more stable and to
convince the other that it does have
positive trade expectations and
therefore doesn't have to go on the war
path, doesn't have to even go after
Taiwan. And this, if we want to get to
my bottom line, is the thing about
Taiwan is Taiwan will not is very
unlikely to be attacked in my view
because of these economic constraints.
And it's very important to realize that
China knows this and doesn't want to
upset the apple cart by doing something
perhaps as foolish as taking over Taiwan
and having huge economic sanctions and
disruptions to global value chains and
global supply chains kick in and that
would cause a declining situation for
China that it does not want. So is the
argument for dynamic realism is that
basically that countries can kind of
shift between offensive versus defensive
realism depending on the situation and I
guess their future expectations for the
economy and respective growth and things
like that and if so can you maybe give
us an example an actual historical
example of like where that happened
>> sure I'd love to come back to the Japan
one since people do know about it in my
second book called economic
interdependence and war. I study through
two chapters uh three chapters really
Japan's growth from 1880 onwards and the
number of conflicts it did get into with
Russia for example in 1904 and of course
with the US in 1941 but also the long
periods of peace that Japan had and why
was Japan oscillating between relative
peace and then allout major conflict
well it has obviously a lot to do with
commerce and its expectations of the
future. So I wouldn't say that the great
powers are oscillating themselves
between offensive and defensive realism.
What I actually try to do is blend the
two into one single argument. So that uh
what this means is that states are
constantly grappling every moment really
with this trade-off between trying to
expand their power sphere, economic
power sphere, their economic connections
so they can grow their own power base,
their long-term power base through trade
and avoiding kicking in or propelling a
cycle of mistrust and hostility with
another state that might lead to a war
that neither side wants. So think of the
Japan case. Japan initially from 1880 to
really 1900 was relatively moderate,
relatively moderate. It had a small war
with China but uh it tried to avoid big
wars with big powers and yet it got
itself into a Russo-Japanese war in
1904. But that was largely because of
Russia's bad behavior, you might say, in
Manuria and its threat to Japan's
willingness and effort to trade more
extensively with China itself. So it's
quite clear bump from the documents that
Japan reluctantly after trying diplomacy
got into a war with Russia that it
started Japan started the war but it did
so only reluctantly after diplomacy had
failed. In other words, it its negative
expectations kicked it into a more
aggressive mode. I wouldn't call that
offensive realism. I would call it my
dynamic realist approach, which says if
you believe you're declining because of
trade cutoffs or expectations of trade
cutoffs, you're going to become
aggressive and you have to be aggressive
to protect your long-term trade
position. Now, guess what? After World
War I in the 1920s, Japan was very
moderate. They we call it shidahara
diplomacy after the foreign minister
Shidahara. But Japan worked with the US.
It had arms controlled agreements with
the US. It increased quite extensively
its trade with the United States and
with all great powers. And guess what?
1930 comes along and with the great
depression, the US, this is contemporary
importance. US kicks in these very high
tariffs. These high tariffs called the
Smoot Holly tariffs of 1930 completely
devastated Japan. Japan lost 2thirds of
its trade in one and a half years
because of the Smoot Holly tariffs. And
that changed everything. Japan even with
Shidahara still in the government
decided to, as everyone knows, invade
Manuria and take over a huge part of
China. Take it over and control it
militarily. That was September 1931. And
then with China at least things just got
went from bad to worse. And by 193839 it
was fighting wars with the Soviet Union
on the Manurion border. And that led the
US to further restrictions on oil in
particular by 1941. And those oil
restrictions that were coordinated with
Britain and the Dutch led to Japan
declining by my estimation about 20% per
year. And that led to Pearl Harbor. Now
there's a lot of details there. Japan
trying to get the oil back through
diplomacy. The US almost making
agreements and then cutting those
diplomatic agreements off and leading to
the pessimism, the negative expectations
of future trade that led to a massive
war we call the Pacific War. But that's
a parallel, a very powerful one. And the
Chinese understand that they understand
that they do not want to get into a
tariff spiral. tit fortat, a decoupling
of our e of the two economies that could
make China start to decline in relative
power and make it turn to the ultimate
weapon which is this preventive war to
restore trade especially in Southeast
Asia which did not go well for Japan and
everyone knows that. So China wants to
avoid that.
[Music]
I don't want to like skip to the final
chapter of the book here. So, the
proverbial book,
>> but Smooth Holly, these various trade
restrictions, like it does not sound
good. It sounds like if someone was
listening to you about what is the
optimal way to avoid war, it sounds like
we're on the exact opposite trajectory
as of right now.
>> Well, here's the thing, and Joe, you in
some ways embedded this in your point.
If we at least in my view, if we
understand history, if we understand
good theory as well and have a more
dynamic realist approach which shows
these rational actors making trade-offs
in policy between two or three different
forms of realism, if you will, then we
can avoid the mistakes we made in the
past.
>> We can. But I'm just saying at least in
terms of the policy choices that we've
seen lately that does not sound like we
are making the choices that reduce the
temperature.
>> Ah but this is what's so interesting.
Let's just go back in time here. Think
of early April and Trump initially if
when he held up his big sign had 33% or
34% tariffs on China and much higher
tariffs on other states you know
Thailand and so forth. And that sign was
a sign that Trump was going to go all
out with tariffs on everyone, on every
product. Most economists, and myself
included, I have a background in
economics, would say this was a foolish
policy. But guess what happened? Within
a week or so, he backed away from the
massive tariffs on all the allies. But
because I think he had to at least show
that he was still tough, he went to 145%
tariffs on China. And China, of course,
retaliated. That's what you do in
bargaining. You you show your resolve
and you stick to your guns and you show
that you can hurt the other. And once
China kicked in high tariffs or the
prospect of it and especially after it
said to the US, we will not send you
rare earth and critical minerals. we
will not give you the kind of minerals
you need to be a high-tech economy.
Guess what happened? May 12th, there was
an agreement and the agreement basically
said, "Oh, well, let's hold off on any
big tariffs for, you know, 90 days and
we went back down to I think for the US
30% and China 10%." Was it a victory?
Not really. But what did it show? It
showed that the learning curve was very
steep within an administration that is
not known for having a huge knowledge of
history. Let's be honest. But there were
enough smart people in the Treasury
Department, the Commerce Department, I
think in the defense department that
said if we keep this up, we could get
the Smooth Holly effect. We could get
the 1930s all over again. we could get a
decoupling of the two economies which
from China's point of view and Bloomberg
itself a year ago uh kind of confirmed
this which from China's point of view
could cause a 15 to 17% decline in
China's economy should a full decoupling
and trade sanctions kick in. So I'm not
pessimistic to be honest. I'm actually
optimistic that there's enough learning
already going on to make sure that we
will get an agreement, I believe, with
China on tariffs. They won't be super
high, maybe, I don't know, 35% or
something, but they're not going to be
the kinds of embargo type of tariffs
that we saw in 1941
that they weren't even tariffs. They
were just Japan, you will not get any
oil from us, the US, or from our allies.
And that was what was causing such
distress within the Japanese leadership.
So you can see again that I have a bit
of an agenda here. My agenda is to get
this history out there so that people
can understand what mistakes were made,
why states were not fully rational even
if they were thinking largely in my
terms and what kinds of adjustments we
can make now to avoid even a cold war
let alone a hot war.
The example of rare earths just then
actually reminded me of something I
wanted to ask which is in your analysis
or your framework, does it matter
whether the trade between two respective
sides or maybe multiple respective sides
is driven by exports or imports or
capital flows? Like is there a
qualitative difference in how people are
thinking about foreign policy depending
on where the trade tension is actually
coming in? like if it's oil or like if
it's rare earths something that people
deem crucial to their technological
development.
>> Well, Tracy is a great question and very
much understudied within the field of
international relations. I should
mention my background I was originally
born in Canada but my background up in
Canada was in business and economics and
I worked as a as a finance and marketing
executive in Toronto for a couple of
years before I saw the light and studied
international relations. truly the
perfect guest.
>> Well, there you go. And you know, we can
talk corporate policies as well. But
what I learned from that time period of
my life, but also from my knowledge and
study of history, is that specific
products matter a lot. The qualitative
nature of the product matters. I'm going
to give you an example I always give my
students, which is if you have a car,
you might say that the gas in the car is
what 1% of the weight of the car and
maybe less than that in terms of its
value. But you can't drive the car
without gas. And so that people say,
"Oh, rare earths are only, you know, 1%
of our imports." Well, if you can't have
rare earths, you can't build the
computers that we're talking through
right now. You can't be at least at the
technological edge, and China will then
overtake you technologically. And
ironically,
China knows this and is using this to
say to the US, you want to stay, you
know, equal with us or ahead of us in,
let's say, the highest of high-tech
products like semiconductors and so
forth. Well, you're going to need our
rarers and we want to be coupled with
you economically because that means our
domestic stability at home will be
strong. So, let's play this game
together and keep our trade levels high.
That's the Chinese position. And we can
talk about China's domestic constraints
later if you want. That's my new book
project. And I'm writing an article
right now on rare earths with a student
of mine. And the bottom line here is
that China has for 30 years had a very
calculated strategy. America, we forget,
actually produced about 30% of rare
earth. Oh, about 35 years ago. Now it
produces almost none. And China has
either it produces all the rarers at
home or more importantly it creates
connections with Congo and you know
Indonesia and other places so that it
can process the rarers within China that
gives China complete almost monopoly
control over most of the rarers that go
into computers and AI systems and so
forth. So, it's a smart strategy because
China is very vulnerable on food, on on
energy supplies, on other imports, but
it has this one thing that they it knows
the US needs and wants, and that's its
leverage point for bargaining, and it
used it. It played that ace of spades in
April, and it worked. Within two weeks,
there was a deal. Oh, wow. How did that
happen? Well, China knows that the
Americans have enough smart people at
the top to say to the president, "Mr.
President, you want to grow and develop
a very high-tech economy. You want to
bring manufacturing at the highest level
back to the US, Intel, and so forth."
Well, I'm sorry, sir. We can't do that
without the Chinese rarers. So, let's
keep that going. And I'll just say very
quickly and we can talk about it, but
China also has another lever lever and
that of course is China has been buying
Treasury bills from the US for some
three decades. And China still controls
oh about a trillion, a little less than
a trillion dollars worth of US Treasury
bills. It could dump those and destroy
the dollar's power, at least its its
relative strength. And it doesn't want
to do that because hey, it wants to keep
the economy economic relationship going.
But it can threaten that. And that's
another very vulnerable point. We know
that part of the reason Trump backed
away from the initial tariffs, as
everyone knows, is not because of the
stock market, but it was because people
were fleeing from the US dollar in that
first weeks of April. And the real
long-term implications for US growth
were devastating because we have a huge
deficit and a large debt. We have to get
more money coming in from abroad to pay
for it. And if the US dollar makes the
Treasury bill yields the interest rate
go up, then that costs the American
government a huge amount of money. So
keeping interest rates low and Treasury
bill yields low was vital to all of
this. So you can see again from a
learning perspective, I think the
Americans have already had cold water
splashed in their face and they said,
"Yeah, it's cold. We don't want to uh go
down that road." So what am I
pessimistic about Brazil? Okay, maybe
Brazil and Canada.
>> Actually, I'm glad you said Brazil
because um I was going to ask about
this. If so much of these questions
hinge on expectations,
Yes. It seems like very hard right now,
I would imagine, for other countries
around the world to calibrate
expectations when President Trump
announces that there's going to be 50%
tariffs on Brazil and that a major
reason for the tariffs is the treatment
of former President Bolsinaro, which is
like, you know, seems like it comes out
of nowhere. Is that really an economic
thing? You know, how do countries other
countries even begin to form
expectations at a time when trade policy
in the United States is so volatile? The
policy itself is volatile and the sort
of rationale for the policy is seemingly
quite unpredictable. Well, it's a great
question because it goes to the heart of
how do I
>> in my technological language
operationalize this idea of expectations
of your trade? How in political science
terms do I measure this and how do I
understand how others see the US or the
US sees others? Now, part of the way to
do this historically is just look at the
documents. If you think of it as a
spectrum from 100% I'm assured that
we're going to keep trade going with
100% certainty, that's great. You know,
that was the USC Canada relationship up
until last 6 months. Well, great. That's
that's certainty at one end. There's
also certainty at the other end where
I'm absolutely certain you're going to
keep cutting me off. You are cutting me
off and there's nothing I can do
diplomatically to get the trade back.
That was Japan by November of 1941. I've
looked at the documents. The Japanese
tried everything to get the trade back,
including offers of major concessions.
And for a very interesting reason, FDR,
Franklin Roosevelt, could not do that.
And he almost made deals three times and
he cut them off each time. And I'll give
you a quick small hint at what the real
reason is. He had to save the Soviet
Union from a two-front war between
Germany on one end and Japan on the
other. So by drawing the Japanese south,
not against Pearl Harbor, he didn't know
about that, but drawing the Japanese
south, he prevented the um the Soviets
from having to fight a two-front war
that saved basically the world from Nazi
Germany taking over Eurasia. That's a
that's a sideline. I don't want to get
into it. It's a second book. But what is
important here is the Japan leadership
had relatively
intermediate expectations in April of
41. Oh, you're cutting us off from some
kinds of oil and or gas and iron ore.
So, well, let's work on that. So, what
I'm saying is if you think of it as a
spectrum, uh, Joe,
>> and you can then calculate out how do
others deal with your policies and vice
versa. So, what does Brazil do? Brazil
says, "My gosh, this came out of
nowhere. I was, you know, relatively
confident, let's say 70% confident we
were going to get some kind of deal. Now
things are off the table." But knowing
what Trump does, which is throw things
out and then, you know, retreat from
them. You'd have to say what you're
going to do is say, "Well, it's 50/50. I
don't know where he's going to go with
this. It could be 50% tariffs. Could
easily be something he pulls away from
in another 6 weeks. Let's hedge. Let's
wait. Let's do the wait and see policy.
And of course, that's just classic logic
that we all know and love in our daily
lives, which is when you're not kind of
certain about things, you try not to
overreact, but you also try not to uh do
nothing. You try to hedge your bets, as
they say, and you make sure you can deal
with either scenario in the best way.
And then you wait. And that's what what
we would call an expectations research a
kind of middle ground where I can't
decide one way or the other. So for sake
of argument, I'm going to say it's 50/50
that he'll go one way or the other.
Therefore, let's wait and see and hedge
through other policies aligning with the
other bricks. For example, the China and
Indas of the world. Diversifying is a
great term that from all worlds,
especially the business world. In
situations like that, you diversify away
from the big risk and you go towards
lower risk items like trade with you
know the Europeans and then you use that
as leverage in the bargaining because
after all the core thesis here is that
it's not just that traditional realist
view of deterministic wars that are
caused by these things that you can't do
anything about. And you know that's the
traditional view that Mirshimer and
others often promote. My view is a much
more subtle one which says these factors
matter but you have control control over
those expectations by your own policies
and therefore you can use diplomacy and
leveraging through bargaining to affect
the other's expectations and avoid the
kind of conflicts that have so
pockmarked history.
[Music]
So speaking of different policies, I
mean one of the things that has happened
in recent years are the technological
limitations imposed on China by the US
and we've seen those carried on from the
first Trump administration into the
Biden administration and now into the
second administration as well.
And some people would argue that there's
a sense that maybe those restrictions
have led to China ramping up its
technological progress or certainly
feeling a sense of urgency that perhaps
it didn't feel as much before. And so
I'm curious to what extent can this sort
of fear of external limitations on
commerce or trade, how much of that
could be solved domestically instead of
through, you know, outward-f facing
aggressive expansion or maybe even
non-aggressive expansion and
partnerships with friendlier countries.
Oh, that is a fantastic question, Tracy.
And I like the way you phrased it
because it allows me to talk
historically about countries who have
seen or expect to see restrictions on
certain products and therefore try to
adjust. Let's talk about Japan and
Germany in the 1930s. You know, many
years before the wars actually occurred,
both sides were trying to synthesize at
home oil and gas. and they were trying
to do so because they either expected or
were already being cut off from certain
kinds of energy sources, especially the
Middle East oil. And so Japan did not
succeed. Germany was able to use coal
and other things to synthesize quite a
high percentage of its oil and gas that
it needed during World War II. Quite
surprising in a way. But here's the
thing. States undergo those kinds of
things reluctantly. And there's almost
always great inefficiencies in doing so.
As you can imagine, you have to make
trade-offs once again and you trade away
from other things that could build your
power more efficiently because you are
reluctant to spend your money trying to
do what you're talking about. And now
China has been trying to build, let's
not kid ourselves, they've been trying
to build a very strong technological
base for 30 years. And especially when
Ci Jinping got into power, he announced
it right away that by 2025, that was his
that was his date. China would be
largely self-sufficient in semiconductor
production. Well, hey, as the figure I
saw that is right now, China still
requires 70 to 75% of its semiconductors
from abroad, at least the high-tech
ones, and almost all of those come from,
ironically, Taiwan, but also Japan and
South Korea. And of course, Nvidia and
other US companies are very important in
all of this as well, because it's not
just about the production, it's about
the design of these semiconductors and
the AI that goes with them. So let's
just put ourselves in the shoes of
China. Would they have ramped it up a
bit as you say because of these
restrictions that started in 2017? Sure,
they ramped it up, but were they trying
to do it anyways? Yes, that's what Ci
Jinping announced in 2012. So they were
already trying to do these kinds of
things. So have they been slowed by the
restrictions? Yes, I would argue it's
quite obvious they have been. What is
the alternative? Well, the alternative
is to allow the free flow of all of our
highest of high-tech into China and
allow Taiwan and South Korea and Japan
and our other allies to allow them to
produce whatever they want with the
highest of high-tech that comes from us.
And this includes, by the way, the Dutch
machines, the ASML machines that make
the chips in Taiwan. Taiwan doesn't make
the machines, it makes the chips. And
those machines come from from a little
state called the Netherlands. And those
machines, $200 million or so, they're
broken into four or five parts and
shipped on four or five separate 747s to
get to Taiwan. Well, those machines are
not allowed into China. They're not the
highest of high-tech ones. The lower
level machines. Yeah. Okay. Those can go
in. So, China still has a problem. It
can't make the so-called under seven
nanometer chips very efficiently. It has
to jimmy rig it with old technology and
it's done an amazing job of jimmyrigging
it and paying the efficiency costs to do
so. But does that mean China will be
able to be the high-tech producer of the
highest tech chips and then export
those? No. Can it do it to make it so
that it can supply its own Huawei and
let's say Apple iPhone manufacturing
within China? Uh maybe but at a higher
cost. And at the end of the day those
chips may not be the highest of high
quality. And every year, China knows
it's falling behind or at least let's
just say Taiwan and the others including
now the US and Intel are still at the
cutting edge of the under five nanometer
chips now under four nanometer chips and
those are what are essential to AI. So
am I in favor of continued restrictions?
Yes. Am I aware that there are uh ways
to get around it? Yes.
This sort of goes back to something you
were talking about the types of
countries that you want to trade with
and there are disagreements about how we
should perceive China's ambitions. I'm
sure there are scores of books out there
and the book jacket is like bright red
or something like that and they sort of
portray China as this like very
aggressive power with global ambitions
and they talk about all the artificial
islands they're building and the various
exercises that they're doing with their
navy and disputed territories and all
kinds of things like that. On the other
hand, you know, like uh I read um Henry
Kissinger's book about China a couple
years ago, and the way he depicts it is
that from its earliest history, China
has never had much, I would say,
interest in some sense outside of trade,
much interest in the goings on of the
rest of the world. It's just not that
excited about that. Unlike the Soviet
Union, it didn't have a comment trying
to ferment communism in other countries,
etc. uh that it you know besides trade
it it did not have particularly
expansionist visions. Talk to us about
like where you land. It sounds like you
land more on the latter but how we
should just think about China's own
ambitions visa v the rest of the world.
>> Well in a way Joe this is the ultimate
question because we know that China may
or may not overtake the US in total GDP.
Yeah that's an open air question. But
whether China, if it does overtake the
US or even if it doesn't, has ambitions
to control more of the world or control
Southeast Asia or militarily dominate
Africa. Those are the kinds of questions
that keep people up at night. And my
argument, as always, is a nuanced one.
I'm not a dove or a hawk. I'm a it
depends kind of person. And here's where
it depends. What is important is to
understand both what I would call the
propelling factors of history and the
constraining factors. The propelling
factors indeed are realist ones. Uh all
great powers when they rise, Germany and
Japan after 1870, the US after 1890, all
those rising powers do want to expand
what I call their economic power
spheres. They want to build navies to
protect those spheres. They have a
Mahanian Alfred theor Mahan kind of
logic that says hey we need more trade
to grow but if we're going to protect
that trade we need a navy and we need to
build a navy now so China has done that
and that's just classic that's a
strategy that all great powers have done
and it scares the declining states let's
be honest Britain got scared of Germany
and and Japan other states got scared of
the Soviet Union when it built a
bluewater navy but especially with China
because of its high trade trade. This is
very scary because now China is the
dominant economic trading partner for
more than 100 countries, Southeast Asia
especially. And let's be
straightforward,
they have built a navy that's almost
second to none, certainly in Southeast
Asian area, and is starting to challenge
the US for global positioning,
posturing, you might say, in the naval
realm. That is worrisome. It's very
worrisome as well because with a more
realist hat on again, you have to say
you never quite know or certain about
the other's future intentions. You may
even like them now as Truman likes
Stalin in 1945, but you may be uncertain
about what the other will be like in 10
or 15 years time. That's a classic more
offensive realist position to say, "Oh,
the future intentions of China are
uncertain. So, we have to prepare now.
we have to at least assume that they're
going to be bad later. So, let's contain
them now. That's the sort of logic that
gets hawks going at night. But if you
understand this more dynamic balanced
view of realism, you would say, hey,
it's one thing to contain, but it's also
another thing to push the other through
containment into a hardline stance. and
you push them into a position they might
not otherwise have wanted to be which is
namely an aggressive or expansionistic
power. So you have to balance that off.
How do you do this? How do you read the
tea leaves of Chinese intentions even
now but especially in 10 or 15 years
time? Well, you know this is where
Kissinger is right but also wrong. He's
right that the history this is my new
book. The history of China suggests that
Chinese leaders do not like going abroad
with their troops. They don't like
taking over areas outside of China
because whenever they've done so,
they've had major problems at home. And
I've looked at the last uh 2,000 years
of history, and I can identify at least
five times when dynasties have fallen
because they've gone abroad or gotten
too involved in overseas issues. We can
talk about those if you want. But the
Chinese leaders know their history and
they know that going abroad can lead to
domestic instability and that's a
constraint. Where Kissinger's wrong is
that he ignores the new and quite
unusual economic dimension of China's
posturing towards the world. China for
really, you know, most of its history
has not been that economically involved
in the world, at least beyond its
immediate neighbors. And this is what's
new. China is now has 38% of its GDP
tied up in exports and imports. That's
an incredible figure. It's the highest
I've seen since 1905, and that was
Britain. And Britain had most of its
trade with colonies. And China's trade
is with countries it doesn't control. So
that's a very concerning thing for
China. But it needs that. It needs that
to grow the economy, to be
technologically superior, and of course
to keep domestic stability. Now, that's
the that's the kicker. Guess what? If
China needs the trade to keep domestic
stability because it needs to grow the
economy and people need to feel that the
Chinese Communist Party is legitimate,
well, then it has to keep riding that
tiger by having more trade. And if it's
going to have more trade around the
world, it needs to protect that with
military or at least naval power. But
that can also excite or create this
spiral of misunderstanding with the very
states that are on top. The US is
declining relatively speaking and it
worries about that rising power. So
where's my bottom line here? If we bring
in the Kissinger insight which Chinese
history shows that China doesn't like to
go abroad because of domestic concerns
but then add in the economic dimension
which is China has to go abroad
economically to keep the peace at home.
Then you see that you might be able to
keep China peaceful by ensuring they
have positive expectations about the
future trading system. If China does
believe that the US is not decoupling,
and Biden made sure of that in 2023 when
there was some talk of it, he said, "Oh,
we're de-risking, Mr. Ci Jinping. We're
not decoupling." Oh, good. That was
great. Trump, you know, almost implied
that they were going to fully decouple
in April. Then he backed away from that
in by early May. I don't think he will
decouple. I will almost put a hundred
bucks on it if you want to say that. And
that's that's important because that
means peace can be kept through this
mechanism of expectations.
>> All we need is Trump to go to Beijing
for a few big banquetss. It sounds
>> There you go. That's important.
I just have one more question and it
follows on naturally from one of your
previous points about I guess the
dangers of foreign entanglements and
China's history you know trying to
control and defend its very very massive
empire and also feed its massive empire
but you've talked about the belt and
road initiative and in the context of
countries caring a lot about future
commerce you know striking all these
deals and making all these investments
in alternative allies or other countries
makes a lot of sense. But in recent
years, we've seen China sort of scale
down some of those ambitions, some of
the Belt and Road projects. And I'm just
curious how that action fits into your
framework and how you would interpret
that.
>> Yeah, it's a good point. And although
scaling down is an interesting point. If
you're growing at 10% in terms of your
sending money abroad and you go to 7%
you're scaling back but you're still
growing. So the way I read Belt and Road
is they realized that the initial
efforts were not as successful for China
as they wanted them to be and a lot of
countries were not able to pay back
their loans. After all most of it is
loans and so that restricted China's
benefits. But the belt and road is still
the critical element in their larger
global call them ambitions which is to
have connections economically with
pretty well every country and area of
the world including our backyard of
South America. So Belden Road is still I
would say going strong but it's being
retoled and and recalibrated to make it
more effective for China. What is
important to realize is where that came
from. Now here's the thing that we
forget. We think of this as 2012 and Ci
Jinping announcing the initially it was
called one belt one road
elu and you know it was an interesting
idea and he really went with it and he
created a banking system to support it.
Well that was really back to the 1990s
in this so-called going abroad strategy.
I can't remember the Mandarin for that
but the the going abroad strategy was
very similar. It was basically the idea
that if we don't start to create major
investments abroad and tie those to uh
imports of raw materials, we will start
to decline. We might not get even 7%
growth, let alone 10% growth. And so
they saw what we call the sort of
downside of the growth curve, the
S-curve, and they didn't want to have
that happen. So they went abroad. That's
a classic strategy. The US has done it
too. And the belt and road was a
formalization of this. There's a great
book by Minure on this that traces this
back to the 1990s. And why why be this
is a strategy that they need growth
through trade and trade requires us to
invest and not just to form trade
partners. And if we can develop their
infrastructure, especially African
countries or Asian countries that need
the infrastructure to export the
materials, then we will benefit. We will
benefit strongly from that. So, it's
going to keep going. It's going to be
retoled. It's going to be very strong.
And it's a scary thing for the US, which
is almost always controlled most of
those uh global south states in terms of
where that trade goes. and the US dollar
of course being very much a part of
that. So what I foresee is that China
will keep that going support it with the
Mahanian naval strategy. The US will
continue to see that as somewhat scary.
But as long as, at least in South
America, as long as that doesn't go
along with military installments in
South America Caribbean like the Cuban
missile crisis, we will probably let it
happen because we don't want to have the
spiral of hostility backfire on us. So
again, two rational actors, if they're
rational, will balance off and trade off
this desire for more power and economic
connection with the fear that they might
cause a spiral of misunderstanding that
leads to war and they'll play it right
if I'm correct or at least I hope
they'll they'll read it.
>> Yes. Likewise. I have one last question.
I've asked a few different people this
Xihinping you mentioned. Okay. He
introduced the one belt one road
project. How much is he a continuation?
How much is there a consistent red
strain red ribbon throughout all of the
postmou leaders versus how much is he a
pivot from the direction of you know say
huge tao and uh his predecessors
>> well I think one also has to say that
when you deal with understanding the
other's intentions uh in any school of
realism or international relations you
have to deal with three different levels
you have to start at the personal level
and is ci Jinping himself different. you
have to start at the domestic level and
say is he under certain domestic
constraints or pressures that the others
didn't have or is he dealing with a
different systemic environment namely
China's place in the world and what it
needs to accomplish and there's a
tendency of almost everybody to go after
Ci Jinping's personal side and say well
he's a dictator he wants more power he's
you know he wants his place in history
he he might attack Taiwan because of his
desire for a place in history. To be
honest, I think Putin is very much in
that realm. He's driven by his personal
aspects, not from rational calculations
of geopolitics. But if you go to the
domestic and the more systemic level, I
think you can see C Jinping as being
very much in line with what Deng
Xiaoping laid down in the early 1990s,
which initially was a so-called strategy
of hide and b to hide your power and
grow your power, grow your economic
strengths through trade and b your time
for long-term growth. And that of course
was the strategy until Ci Jinping. And a
lot of people say, "Oh, well, Ci Jinping
threw over Deng Xiaoping." Not really.
Think about 2023.
He then once he was becoming very much
aware that wolf warrior diplomacy and
hardline tactics were backfiring and
causing this spiral of misunderstanding,
he made concessions on that. He backed
away from the more aggressive, call it,
foreign policies that he had come to be
known for propagating. Well, hey, that
is still there under the surface. He
still likes to sort of bully other
states. Yeah, that's true. But China's
longer strategy is still to grow as a
rising power and to use trade for that
purpose. And so, he's showing a lot more
signs of being a moderate leader than he
ever has before because he needs those
trade ties. and he's using actually the
Trump tariff chaos to create more trade
ties with Europe and the bricks and
South America and so forth. So I suspect
that it's not as much his personality as
much as his realization of what is
rational for China over the long term.
Now the final thing I'll say on this
regard is C Jinping of course was a more
minor official through those earlier
periods of the 90s and 2000s but all of
the Chinese leaders understood that
basic point which is that we need to
grow over the long term. We need trade
to do so but we also need to avoid
having ourselves cut off from that trade
by being overly assertive or aggressive
on the world stage. What do we do? We
balance. We sometimes strategize. so
that we, you know, use a little bit of a
lever, a lever over a state like trying
to tell Japan in 2010, we won't accept
your policy over these islands and we're
going to cut you off from rarers. So the
rarest threat was first broached in 2010
and it worked and Japan and China still
trade very heavily. That didn't mean
China had a new aggressive strategy and
that was before Ci Jinping. It just used
those as levers. So in the end I see C
Jinping as very uh I would call him
Machavevelian in the in the good sense
of the word of strategizing rational
calculating the future making sure he
pushes out but pulls back when he's
getting uh push back from other states
and making sure most of all because of
China's economy and the importance of
trade to it making sure that it builds
those trade ties and does not cut China
off from those trade ties and that is
why in the end she's Jinping keeps
talking about Taiwan as you implied
Tracy, you know, we could have thought
of China being ready for war against
Taiwan 20 years ago. Well, it's still
being postponed and it's being postponed
for a very good reason. That is the 17%
decline that Bloomberg pronounced a year
ago that the decline in the Chinese
economy if economic sanctions kicked in
after an invasion of Taiwan. So, if you
bring it all the way back to your first
points about Taiwan, I'm not optimistic
or pessimistic. I just think for
rational strategic reasons, the CCP, the
Communist Party, and Ci Jinping have no
immediate reason for wanting to invade
Taiwan. And they know that the downside
is so huge economically that whatever
their other reasons, Glory included,
they are not going to do that if it
means destroying everything they've
worked for for 40 years, their economic
growth.
>> Dale Copeland, very interesting
conversation. Really appreciate you uh
coming on. Uh thanks for coming on.
>> Thanks so much, D.
>> Great. Thank you.
[Music]
Well, that made me feel a little bit
better tracing. I was about to ask.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. Well, I mean, what do I know?
I don't have any view on this question,
but I was freaked out after how
confident Andrew Bishop was about the
prospect for war. And I like the idea
that there are compelling rational
counterarguments for what someone would
see as just a a matter of time or an
inevitability.
>> You know, you mentioned all those uh
books with red covers where they talk
about like the danger and the threat of
China. It's funny because I remember
reading I think it was reasonably
wellknown, but there was a book that
argued the exact opposite. So, kind of
to Dale's point, this idea that like
actually China has a history of having
to worry about, you know, its domestic
borders and things like that, and it was
called The Great Wall and the Empty
Fortress, and it too had a red cover.
It's like both sides, they're always
red.
>> It's so cliche. If you go to I, you
know, I sometimes stop at the Strand
bookstore on my way home because it's
like right there. I love that place.
>> Yeah. And I, you know, walk to the China
section regularly. It's just a wall of
red. It's like publishers, come on. I
get it. They're communist, their flag is
red, but like come on, you got to get a
little bit more creative than that.
>> Yes, indeed. Um, one thing that I
thought was really interesting, and I
probably knew this already in the back
of my mind, but I guess I hadn't really
thought about it, but the length of time
between the Smoot Holly tariffs and
Japan invading Manuria
>> was basically a year. So, I guess the
tariffs were 1930 and then Japan invaded
Manuria in 1931. That's extraordinary.
No, the connection to and uh you know I
made it through the whole episode
without bringing up wages of
destruction.
>> Now you're going to do it.
>> Well, and here it comes. There is a lot
in there about Germany's turning coal
into synthetic oil. A very detailed
discussion of that which Dale brought
up. But then also just more importantly
the link between the Great Depression in
the United States and then the collapse
of economic opportunities for all these
countries and how that forced them into
this more aggressive posture so to
speak. So revisiting that history
because you know in my mind like when I
think about World War II typically you
know it's sort of easy to forget how
like you know the 1929 stock market
crash and the sort of domestic economic
crisis in the US and Western Europe etc.
how directly that led to a lot of the
heightened conflict.
>> We should start like a betting market or
something to see if you can mention
wages of destruction in every episode of
Odd Bots from now until the end of the
year.
>> I'm not that bad. You triggered me by
even saying it in the beginning, which
was sort of cheating. I might have gone
the whole episode without saying it had
you.
>> I know, but I believe you could do it in
a in a relatively relevant way.
>> Yes. Thank you. Well, it's true. It was
relevant in this particular uh
discussion.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Dale Copeland. is at Copla492.
Follow our producers Kerman Rodriguez at
Kerman Arman, Dashelb Bennett at
Dashbot, and Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks.
For more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots,
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics, including China.
There's a China channel in there in our
Discord, discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when Joe fulfills his destiny as a
middle-aged man talking about World War
II, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.